



NMOP                                                            O. Havel
Internet-Draft                                                 B. Claise
Intended status: Informational                                    Huawei
Expires: 30 August 2024                                    O. G. D. Dios
                                                              Telefonica
                                                            A. Elhassany
                                                                 T. Graf
                                                                Swisscom
                                                            M. Boucadair
                                                                  Orange
                                                        27 February 2024


   Modeling the Digital Map based on RFC 8345: Sharing Experience and
                              Perspectives
                    draft-havel-nmop-digital-map-00

Abstract

   This document shares experience in modelling Digital Map based on the
   IETF RFC 8345 topology YANG modules and some of its augmentations.
   First, the concept of Digital Map is defined and its connection to
   the Digital Twin is explained.  Next to Digital Map requirements and
   use cases, the document identifies a set of open issues encountered
   during the modelling phases, the missing features in RFC 8345, and
   some perspectives on how to address them.

   Discussion Venues

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/OlgaHuawei.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."



Havel, et al.            Expires 30 August 2024                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            Digital Map Modelling            February 2024


   This Internet-Draft will expire on 30 August 2024.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2024 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     1.1.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   2.  Digital Map and Digital Twin Relationship . . . . . . . . . .   6
     2.1.  Digital Twin  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     2.2.  Digital Map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     2.3.  Digital Map as a Prerequisite for Digital Twin  . . . . .   7
   3.  The IETF Network Topology Approaches  . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     3.1.  IETF Network Topology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     3.2.  IETF Network Topology TE  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   4.  Digital Map Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     4.1.  Why RFC8345 is a Good Approach for Digital Map
           Modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     4.2.  Design Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   5.  Digital Map Modelling Experience  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     5.1.  What is not in the basic model  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
       5.1.1.  Bidirectional Links . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
       5.1.2.  Multipoint Connectivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
       5.1.3.  Links Between Networks  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
       5.1.4.  Networks part of other networks . . . . . . . . . . .  16
       5.1.5.  Nodes, tps and links in multiple networks . . . . . .  17
       5.1.6.  Missing Supporting Relationships  . . . . . . . . . .  18
       5.1.7.  Missing Topology Semantics  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
     5.2.  Open Issues (for Further Analysis or Resolved)  . . . . .  20
     5.3.  How to Augment for Generic Digital Map Extensions . . . .  21
     5.4.  How to Augment for New Technologies/Layers  . . . . . . .  22
     5.5.  How to connect to the external world  . . . . . . . . . .  23
       5.5.1.  How to connect to other YANG modules  . . . . . . . .  23
       5.5.2.  How to connect YANG models with other modelling
               mechanisms  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
     5.6.  Digital Map APIs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23



Havel, et al.            Expires 30 August 2024                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            Digital Map Modelling            February 2024


     5.7.  Digital Map Knowledge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  24
   6.  Related IETF Activities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  24
     6.1.  Network Topology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  24
     6.2.  Core Digital Map Components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  25
     6.3.  Additional Digital Map Components . . . . . . . . . . . .  26
     6.4.  Network Inventory (IVY) Proposed Working  . . . . . . . .  26
   7.  Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  27
   8.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  28
   9.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  28
   10. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  28
     10.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  28
     10.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  29
   Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  32
   Contributors  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  32
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  32

1.  Introduction

   [RFC8345] specifies a topology YANG model with many YANG
   augmentations for different technologies and service types.
   The modelling approach based upon [RFC8345] provides a standard IETF
   based API.

   At the time of writing (2024), there are at least 59 YANG modules
   that are augmenting [RFC8345]; 58 IETF-authored modules and 1 BBF-
   authored module. 14 of these modules have maturity level of
   'ratified', 17 of them have maturity level of 'adopted', 31 modules
   have maturity level of 'latest-approved', and 27 of these modules
   have maturity level of 'initial'.
   The up-to-date information can be found in the YANG Catalog available
   at [Catalog][1].

   From this set of IETF RFCs and IETF I-Ds (at different level of
   maturity), we designed a Digital Map Proof of concept (PoC), with the
   following objectives and functionalities:

   *  Can the central RFC 8345 YANG module be a good basis to model a
      Digital Map?

   *  How the different topology related IETF YANG modules fit (or not)
      together?

   *  Modelling of Digital Map entities, relationships, and rules how to
      build aggregated entities and relationships.  Does the base model
      support key requirements that emerge for a specific layer?






Havel, et al.            Expires 30 August 2024                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            Digital Map Modelling            February 2024


   *  Modelling multiple underlay/overlay layers from Layer 2 to Layer 3
      to customer service layer.  To what extent it is easy to augment
      the base model to support new technologies?

   *  Can the base model be augmented for any new layer and
      technologies?

   This I-D documents an experience in the modeling aspects of the
   Digital Map, based on a PoC implementation, basically documenting the
   effort and the open issues encountered so far.  During the PoC, we
   also identified a set of requirements and verified the PoC approach
   by demoing it iteratively.

   Practically, we developed a PoC with a real lab, based on multi-
   vendor devices, with [RFC8345] as the base YANG module.
   The PoC successfully modelled the following technologies:

   *  Layer 2 network topology (used [RFC8944])

   *  Layer 3 network topology (used [RFC8346])

   *  OSPF routing (aligned with [I-D.ogondio-opsawg-ospf-topology])

   *  IS-IS routing (aligned with [I-D.ogondio-opsawg-isis-topology])

   *  BGP routing

   *  MPLS LDP

   *  MPLS TE tunnels

   *  SRv6 tunnels

   *  L3VPN service

1.1.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP
   14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

   *  Digital Twin - Virtual instance of a physical system (twin) that
      is continually updated with the latter's performance, maintenance
      and health status data throughout the physical system's life cycle
      (as defined in Section 2.2 of
      [I-D.irtf-nmrg-network-digital-twin-arch]



Havel, et al.            Expires 30 August 2024                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            Digital Map Modelling            February 2024


   *  Topology - Network topology defines how physical or logical nodes,
      links and interfaces are related and arranges.  Service topology
      defines how service components (e.g., VPN instances, customer
      interfaces, and customer links) between customer sites are
      interrelated and arranged.  There are at least 8 types of
      topologies: point to point, bus, ring, star, tree, mesh, hybrid
      and daisy chain.  Topologies may be unidirectional or
      bidirectional (bus, some rings).

   *  Topology layer - Defines a layer in the multilayer topology.  A
      multilayer topology models relationships between different layers
      of connectivity, where each layer represents a connectivity aspect
      of the network and service that needs to be configured, controlled
      and monitored.  The layer can also represent what needs to be
      managed by a specific user, for example IGP layer can be of
      interest to the user troubleshooting the routing, while the
      optical layer may be of interest to the user managing the optical
      network.  Some topology layers may relate closely to OSI layers,
      like L1 topology for physical topology, L2 for link topology and
      L3 for IPv4 and IPv6 topologies.  Some topology layers represent
      the control aspects of L3, like OSPF, IS-IS and BGP.  The top
      layer represents the service view of the connectivity, that can
      differ for different types of services and for different
      providers/solutions.

   *  Digital Map - Basis for the Digital Twin that provides a virtual
      instance of the topological information of the network.  It
      provides the core multi-layer topology model and data for the
      Digital Twin and connects them to the other Digital Twin models
      and data.

   *  Digital Map modelling - The set of principles, guidelines, and
      conventions to model the Digital Map using the IETF [RFC8345]
      approach.  They cover the network types (layers and sublayers),
      entity types, entity roles (network, node, termination point or
      link), entity properties and relationship types between entities.

   *  Digital Map model - Defines the core topological entities, their
      role in the network, core properties and relationships both inside
      each layer and between the layers.  It is the basic topological
      model that is linked to other functional parts of the Digital Twin
      and connects them all: configuration, maintenance, assurance
      (KPIs, status, health, symptoms), traffic engineering, different
      behaviors, simulation, emulation, mathematical abstractions, AI
      algorithms, etc






Havel, et al.            Expires 30 August 2024                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft            Digital Map Modelling            February 2024


   *  Digital Map data - Consists of instances of network and service
      topologies at different layers.  This includes instances of
      networks, nodes, links and termination points, topological
      relationships between nodes, links and termination points inside a
      network, relationships between instances belonging to different
      networks, links to functional data for the instances, including
      configuration, health, symptoms.  The data can be historical,
      real-time or future data for what-if scenarios.

2.  Digital Map and Digital Twin Relationship

2.1.  Digital Twin

   The network Digital Twin (referred to simply as Digital Twin)
   concepts and a reference architecture are proposed in the "Digital
   Twin Network: Concepts and Reference Architecture" NMRG I-D
   [I-D.irtf-nmrg-network-digital-twin-arch].

   This document defines the core elements of Digital Twin - Data,
   Models, Interfaces, and Mapping.
   The Digital Twin, constructed based on the four core technology
   elements, is intended to analyze, diagnose, emulate, and control the
   physical network in its whole lifecycle with the help of optimization
   algorithms, management methods, and expert knowledge.

   Also, this document states that a Digital Twin can be seen as an
   indispensable part of the overall network system and provides a
   general architecture involving the whole lifecycle of physical
   networks in the future, serving the application of innovative network
   technologies (e.g., network planning, construction, maintenance and
   optimization, improving the automation and intelligence level of the
   network).

2.2.  Digital Map

   Digital Map provides the core multi-layer topology model and data for
   the Digital Twin and connects them to the other Digital Twin models
   and data.

   The Digital Map modelling defines the core topological entities
   (network, node, link and interface), their role in the network, core
   properties, and relationships both inside each layer and between the
   layers.








Havel, et al.            Expires 30 August 2024                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft            Digital Map Modelling            February 2024


   The Digital Map model is a basic topological model that is linked to
   other functional parts of the Digital Twin and connects them all:
   configuration, maintenance, assurance (KPIs, status, health,
   symptoms), Traffic Engineering (TE), different behaviors and actions,
   simulation, emulation, mathematical abstractions, AI algorithms, etc.

   The Digital Map data consists of virtual instances of network and
   service topologies at different layers.
   The Digital Map provides the access to this data via standard APIs
   for both read and write operations (write operations for offline
   simulations), with query capabilities and links to other YANG modules
   (e.g., Service Assurance for Intent-based Networking (SAIN)
   [RFC9417], Service Attachement Point (SAP) [RFC9408], Inventory
   [I-D.draft-ietf-ivy-network-inventory-yang], and Assets
   [I-D.palmero-opsawg-dmlmo]) and non-YANG models.

2.3.  Digital Map as a Prerequisite for Digital Twin

   One of the important requirements for the digitalization and Digital
   Twin is to ease correlating all models and data to topological
   entities at different layers in the layered twin network.  The
   Digital Map aims to provide a virtual instance of the topological
   information of the network, based on this Digital Map Model.
   Building a Digital Map is prerequisite towards the Digital Twin.

   The Digital Map model/data will provide this missing correlation
   between the topology models/data and all other models/data: KPIs,
   alarms, incidents, inventory (with UUIDs), configuration, traffic
   engineering, planning, simulation ("what if"), emulations, actions,
   and behaviors.

   Some of these models/data provide a device view, some provide a
   network or subnetwork view, while others focus more on the customer
   service perspective.  All these views are needed for both inner and
   outer closed-loops.  It is debatable what is part of the Digital Map
   itself versus what are pointers from the Digital Map to some other
   sources of information.  As an example, the Digital Map should not
   specifically include all information about the device inventory
   (product name, vendor, product series, embedded software, and
   hardware/software versions, as specified in Network Inventory (IVY)
   WG, https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/charter-ietf-ivy/ ): a pointer
   from the Digital Map to another inventory system might be sufficient.

   Similarly, the Digital Map should not specifically contain incidents,
   configuration, data plane monitoring, or even assurance information,
   simply to name a few.





Havel, et al.            Expires 30 August 2024                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft            Digital Map Modelling            February 2024


   The following are some Digital Twin use cases that require Digital
   Map:

   *  Generic inventory queries

   *  Service placement feasibility checks

   *  Service-> subservice -> resource

   *  Resource -> subservice -> service

   *  Intent/service assurance

   *  Service E2E and per-link KPIs on the Digital Map (delay, jitter,
      and loss)

   *  Capacity planning

   *  Network design

   *  Simulation

   *  Closed loop

   Overall, the Digital Map is needed to break down data islands and
   have a Digital Twin for emulation and closed loop, which is a
   catalyst for autonomous networking.

3.  The IETF Network Topology Approaches

3.1.  IETF Network Topology

   [RFC8345] provides a simple generic topological model.  It defines
   the abstract /generic /base model for network and service topologies.
   It provides the mechanism to model networks and services as layered
   topologies with common relationships at the same layer and underlay/
   overlay relationships between the layers.

   [RFC8345] consists of two modules: 'ietf-network' and 'ietf-network-
   topology'.  The 'ietf-network' module defines networks and nodes,
   while 'ietf-network-topology' module adds definitions for links and
   termination points.

   The relationships inside the layer are containment/aggregation (a
   network has nodes, a network has links, a node has termination
   points), source (a link has one source termination point) and
   destination (a link has one destination termination point).




Havel, et al.            Expires 30 August 2024                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft            Digital Map Modelling            February 2024


   The relationships between the layers are modelled via supporting
   relationship

   *  network A is supported by network B - this may model overlay/
      underlay relationship

   *  nodes, links and termination points of network A are supported by
      nodes, links and termination points of network B.
      Overlay and underlay nodes, links and termination points must
      match underlay and overlay networks supporting it

3.2.  IETF Network Topology TE

   [RFC8795] defines a YANG model for representing, retrieving and
   manipulating TE topologies.  This is a more complex model which
   augments [RFC8345] with traffic engineering topology information as
   follows:

   *  TE topology, node, link and termination point are defined using
      the core RFC8345 concepts

      -  TE topology augments network with topology identifier
         (provider, client and topology id), as well as other 'te'
         information

      -  TE node augments node with 'te-node-id' and other 'te'
         information

      -  TE link augments link with te information

      -  TE termination point augments termination point with 'te-tp-id'
         and te information

   *  Tunnel, tunnel termination point, local link connectivity, node
      connectivity matrix, and some supporting and underlay
      relationships are defined outside of the core RFC 8345 entities
      and relationships

4.  Digital Map Requirements

   // We discussed if requirements should be in a separate document.  We
   would leave them in this document for now, later we can create a
   separate draft

   The following are the core requirements for the Digital Map (note
   that some of them are supported by default by [RFC8345]:

   1.   Basic model with network, node, link, interface entity types



Havel, et al.            Expires 30 August 2024                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft            Digital Map Modelling            February 2024


   2.   Layered Digital Map, from physical network (ideally optical,
        layer 2, layer 3) up to customer service and intent

   3.   Open and programmable Digital Map. This includes "Read" to
        understand the view of the network.  It also includes "Write",
        not for the ability to directly change the Digital Map Data (ex:
        changing the network or service parameters), but for offline
        simulations, also known as what-if scenarios.  Doing what-if
        analysis requires the ability to take snapshots and to switch
        easily between them.  Because we have to distinguish between a
        change on the Digital Map for future simulation and a change
        that reflects the current reality of the network.

   4.   Standard based Digital Map Models and APIs, for multi-vendor
        support.  Digital Map must provide the standard APIs that
        provide for Read / Write and queries.  This API must also
        provide the capability to retrieve the links to external data /
        models.

   5.   Digital Map models and APIs must be common over different
        network domains (campus, core, data center, etc.)

   6.   Digital Map must provide semantics for layered network
        topologies and for linking external models/data

   7.   Digital Map must provide inter-layer and between layer
        relationships

   8.   Digital Map must be extensible with meta data

   9.   Digital Map must be pluggable a) We must connect to other YANG
        modules for inventory, configuration, assurance, etc b) Not
        everything can be in YANG, we need to connect digital map YANG
        model with other modelling mechanisms, both southbound,
        northbound and internally

   10.  Digital Map must be optimized for graph traversal for paths.
        This means that only providing link nodes and source and sink
        relationships to termination-points may not be sufficient, we
        may need to have the direct relationship between the termination
        points or nodes

4.1.  Why RFC8345 is a Good Approach for Digital Map Modelling

   The main reason for selecting RFC8345 for modelling is its simplicity
   and that is supports majority of the core requirements.  The
   requirements [1-7] are automatically fulfilled with RFC8345 and
   extensions:



Havel, et al.            Expires 30 August 2024                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft            Digital Map Modelling            February 2024


   *  Basic model with network, node, link and interface entity types

   *  Layered topology

   *  Open and programmable

   *  Standard, multi-vendor

   *  Multi-domain

   *  Semantics for layered topology

   *  Inter-layer and between-layer relationships

   The requirements [6-7] for semantics for layered topology and
   relationships are partially fulfilled, there may be need for some
   additional semantics.  Other core requirements [8-10] are not
   supported by RFC8345:

   *  Extensible with meta data

   *  Pluggable to other YANG modules and non-YANG data

   *  Optimized for graph traversal

   In some cases, for [9] for pluggable to other YANG modules, the links
   are already done by augmenting 'ietf-network' and 'ietf-network-
   topology'.  For others, we need to add some mechanisms to link the
   models and data.

4.2.  Design Requirements

   The following are design requirements for modelling the Digital Map:

   1.  Digital Map should contain only topological information.  Digital
       Map should not contain all data required for all the management
       and use cases, but should have pointers to other functional
       Digital Twin data and models.

   2.  Digital Map entities should contain only properties used to
       identify topological entities at different layers, identify their
       roles and topological relationships between them

   3.  Digital Map should contain only topological relationships inside
       each layer or between the layers (underlay/overlay)

   4.  ACLs and Route Policies will be outside of the Digital Map, they
       would be linked to Digital Map



Havel, et al.            Expires 30 August 2024                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft            Digital Map Modelling            February 2024


   5.  Dynamic paths may either be outside of the Digital Map, part of
       traffic engineering data/models

   6.  Provide capability for conditional retrieval of parts of Digital
       Map

   7.  Must support geo-spatial, temporal, and historical data.  The
       temporal and historical can be supported external to the Digital
       Map.

   The following are the architectural requirements for the Digital Map:

   1.  Scale, performance, integration

   2.  Initial discovery and dynamic (change only) synch

5.  Digital Map Modelling Experience

5.1.  What is not in the basic model

   Based on our PoC and experience, the following are the [RFC8345]
   extensions needed for Digital Map modelling and APIs:

   *  Bidirectional links

   *  Multi-point connectivity

   *  Links between domains/networks

   *  A network decomposition into sub-networks

   *  Nodes, links, and termination points belonging to different
      networks

   *  Supporting relationships between different types of entities

   *  More network topology related semantic is needed

5.1.1.  Bidirectional Links

   The RFC8345 defines all links as unidirectional, it does not support
   bidirectional links.  It was done intentionally to keep the model as
   simple as possible.  The RFC suggests to model the bidirectional
   connections as pairs of unidirectional links.







Havel, et al.            Expires 30 August 2024                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft            Digital Map Modelling            February 2024


   Nevertheless, while simplifying the model itself, we are making data
   and APIs more complex for the cases where we have bidirectional
   links.  And we are increasing the amount of instances / data
   transferred via API, stored in the database, or managed/monitored.

   One of the core characteristics of any network topology is the link
   directionality.  While data flows are unidirectional, the
   bidirectional links are also common in networking.  Examples are
   Ethernet cables, bidirectional SONET rings, socket connection to the
   server, etc.  We also encounter requirements for simplified service
   layer topology, where we want to model link as bidirectional to be
   supported by unidirectional links at the lower layer.

   [I-D.davis-opsawg-some-refinements-to-rfc8345] further elaborates on
   the need for bidirectional links in the network topologies and in the
   Digital Map.  It also proposes how RFC8345 can be augmented to
   support missing components.

   The following are the candidate approaches of how we can address this
   limitation:

   *  Use the current RFC8345 approach and implement it via multiple
      unidirectional links

   *  Don't change RFC8345, leave to different augmentations to solve
      the problem their own way

   *  Augment RFC8345 via basic approach as suggested in
      [I-D.davis-opsawg-some-refinements-to-rfc8345], fully backward
      compatible, appears simple and sufficient

   *  Augment RFC8345 via more sophisticated approach as suggested in
      [I-D.davis-opsawg-some-refinements-to-rfc8345], more complex but
      improves the integrity of the model, same instance structures
      produced

   *  Start working on RFC8345 bis

   We suggest to start the work on RFC8345 bis to provide the backward
   compatible way to support bidirectional links in the core topology
   model defined in ietf-network-topology.  The starting point can be
   the basic approach from
   [I-D.davis-opsawg-some-refinements-to-rfc8345] that adds the
   following:

   *  direction-of-link with value BIDIRECTIONAL

   *  direction-of-point with value BIDIRECTIONAL



Havel, et al.            Expires 30 August 2024                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft            Digital Map Modelling            February 2024


   *  list of termination points that could be used for bidirectional
      links as an alternative to having source and destination for
      unidirectional (although we can also implement it via the existing
      source and destination when direction BIDIRECTIONAL)

5.1.2.  Multipoint Connectivity

   The RFC8345 defines all links as point to point and unidirectional,
   it does not support multi-point links (hub and spoke, full mesh,
   complex).  It was done intentionally to keep the model as simple as
   possible.  The RFC suggests to model the multi-point networks via
   pseudo nodes.

   Same as with unidirectionality, while simplifying the model itself,
   we are making data and APIs more complex for multi point topologies
   and we are increasing the amount of data transferred via API, stored
   in the database or managed/monitored.

   One of the core characteristics of any network topology is its type
   and link cardinality.  Any topology model should be able to model any
   topology type in a simple and explicit way, including point to
   multipoint, bus, ring, star, tree, mesh, hybrid and daisy chain.  Any
   topology model should also be able to model any link cardinality in a
   simple and explicit way, including point to point, point to
   multipoint, multipoint to multipoint or hybrid.

   By forcing the implementation of all topology types and all options
   for cardinality via unidirectional links and pseudo nodes, we are
   significantly increasing the complexity of APIs and data, but also
   lacking full topology semantics in the model.  The model cannot be
   fully used to validate if topology instances are valid or not.

   Note that the point to multipoint network type is also required in
   some cases at the OSPF layer.

   [I-D.davis-opsawg-some-refinements-to-rfc8345] further elaborates on
   the need for multipoint connectivity in network topologies and in the
   Digital Map, in general.  It also proposes how RFC8345 can be
   augmented to support these missing components.

   The following are the candidate approaches of how we can address this
   limitation:

   *  Use the current RFC8345 and implement via virtual nodes

   *  Don't change RFC8345, leave to different augmentations to solve
      the problem their own way (see how it is done in [RFC8795])




Havel, et al.            Expires 30 August 2024                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft            Digital Map Modelling            February 2024


   *  Augment RFC8345 via basic approach as suggested in
      [I-D.davis-opsawg-some-refinements-to-rfc8345], fully backward
      compatible, appears simple and sufficient

   *  Augment RFC8345 via more sophisticated approach as suggested in
      [I-D.davis-opsawg-some-refinements-to-rfc8345], more complex but
      improves the integrity of the model, same instance structures
      produced

   *  Start working on RFC8345 bis that provides backward compatible
      enhancement (similar to
      [I-D.davis-opsawg-some-refinements-to-rfc8345] approach without
      augmentations)

   We suggest to start to work on RFC8345 bis to provide the backward
   compatible way to support multipoint connectivity in the core
   topology model defined in ietf-network-topology.  The starting point
   can be the basic approach from
   [I-D.davis-opsawg-some-refinements-to-rfc8345] that adds the
   following: * list of termination points for multipoint links as an
   alternative to having source and destination for point to point links
   via the existing source and destination * role-of-point * type-of-
   link

5.1.3.  Links Between Networks

   The RFC8345 defines all links as belonging to one network instance
   and having the source and destination as node and termination point
   only, not allowing to link to termination point of another network.
   This does not allow for links between networks in the case of multi-
   domains or partitioning.  The only way would be to model each domain
   as node and have links between them.

   In our IS-IS PoC (following [I-D.ogondio-opsawg-isis-topology]), We
   modelled IS-IS areas as networks and we needed to extend the
   capability to have links between different areas.  We added network
   reference as well to the source / destination of the link.  The
   [RFC8795] also augments links with external-domain info for the case
   of links that connect different domains.

   The IS-IS topology [I-D.ogondio-opsawg-isis-topology] models
   Autonomous System (AS) or IS-IS domain as a network, and IS-IS areas
   as attributes of IS-IS nodes.  The RFC8345 extension can be used to
   model IS-IS areas as networks and IS-IS links between L1-2 nodes as
   links between two different areas.  This is not problem for OSPF,
   although the OSPF nodes can belong to multiple areas, the links can
   belong to only one area.




Havel, et al.            Expires 30 August 2024                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft            Digital Map Modelling            February 2024


   The following are some benefits of lifting the RFC 8345 limitations
   that all links must belong to only one network instance:

   *  IS-IS processes would be grouped in an area via the standard IETF
      RFC8345 network->node relationship.

   *  Applications and algorithms will consume topologies based on the
      generic entities and relationships, they will not need to
      understand the meaning of specific IS-IS attributes.

   *  The approach would be aligned with the IS-IS topology model and
      the IS-IS network view in manuals and documentation.

   *  Provide capability to link different IGP domains and links between
      them.

   *  Link between multiple networks/sub-networks is the common concept
      in network topology.

   The following are the candidate approaches of how we can address this
   limitation:

   *  Use the current RFC8345 and implement domains via properties in
      augmentations

   *  Don't change RFC8345, leave to different augmentations to solve
      the problem their own way (see how it is done in [RFC8795])

   *  Augment RFC8345 by adding some simple solution (e.g. move
      [RFC8795] approach for multi-domain to RFC8345 digital map)

   *  Start working on RFC8345 bis

   We suggest to start to work on RFC8345 bis to provide the backward
   compatible way to support links between networks in the core topology
   model defined in ietf-network-topology.  The starting point can be to
   evaluate the approach from [RFC8795] that adds the external domain
   reference to the link via the external network, node and tp
   reference.

5.1.4.  Networks part of other networks

   RFC8345 does not model networks being part of other networks,
   therefore cannot model subnetworks and network partitioning.  We
   encountered this problem with modelling IS-IS and OSPF domains and
   areas.  The initial goal was to model AS/domain with multiple areas
   so that the Digital Map model contains information about how the AS
   is first split into different IGP domains and how each IGP domain is



Havel, et al.            Expires 30 August 2024                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft            Digital Map Modelling            February 2024


   split into different areas.  This is a common problem for both IS-IS
   and OSPF.

   The following are the candidate approaches of how we can address this
   limitation:

   *  Leave it as it is in RFC8345, don't model AS and IS-IS/OSPF domain
      directly, they would be modelled via the underlying IP network and
      IS-IS/OSPF enabled routers.  This could be achieved via supporting
      relationship to L3 network and L3 nodes

   *  Leave it as it is in RFC8345, leave to different augmentations to
      solve the problem their own way

   *  Leave it as it is in RFC8345, model AS, IGP domains and areas as
      networks and use supporting relationship to model the network
      topology design, with only areas having nodes.  This does not
      describe the correct nature of the relationship, semantic is
      missing.

   *  Augment RFC8345 by adding some simple solution to support
      additional partitioning relationship between networks.

   *  Start working on RFC8345 bis

   We suggest to start to work on RFC8345 bis to provide the backward
   compatible way to support partitioning of networks in the core
   network model defined in ietf-network.  The solution needs to add a
   part-of relation between different networks, where one network (e.g.
   OSPF Domain) can contain multiple networks (e.g.  OSPF areas)

5.1.5.  Nodes, tps and links in multiple networks

   RFC8345 does not allow nodes and TPs to belong to multiple areas
   without splitting them into separate entities with separate keys.  In
   OSPF case we have nodes that can belong to different areas, but
   interfaces can only belong to one area.  In the case of IS-IS,
   although all tutorial are stating that nodes can belong to one area
   only, the ietf, openconfig and vendor yang models and CLI allow IS-IS
   processes with all its interfaces to belong to multiple areas.

   The following are the candidate approaches of how we can address this
   limitation:

   *  Use the current RFC8345 approach, this is not the problem for read
      but may be an issue for write for simulation as we would expect
      that the interface lists in different nodes and networks be the
      same without being able to validate.



Havel, et al.            Expires 30 August 2024                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft            Digital Map Modelling            February 2024


   *  Augment RFC8345 to optionally allow nodes to be defined outside of
      network tree and enable reference as an alternative to the
      containment in the tree.  This may be a bigger change to the
      network topology approach as it would have bigger impact on the
      topology tree.  Nevertheless, it can be an optional approach so
      would be backward compatible for those augmentations that do not
      want to use it

   *  Start working on RFC8345 bis

   We suggest to work on RFC8345 bis to provide the simple backward
   compatible way to support both the current RFC8345 approach of
   creating multiple instances and the approach of sharing the
   instances.  The solution needs further analysis as it has bigger
   impact on the topology tree than other enhancements.

5.1.6.  Missing Supporting Relationships

   RFC8345 defines supporting relationships only between the same type
   of entities.  Networks can only be supported by networks, nodes can
   only be supported by nodes, termination points can only be supported
   by terminations points and links can only be supported by links.

   During the PoC, we encountered the need to have TP supported by node
   and node supported by Network.  The RFC8795 also adds additional
   underlay relationship between node and topology and link and
   topology, but via a new underlay topology and not via the core
   supporting relationship.

   The following are the candidate approaches to address this
   limitation:

   *  Use the current RFC8345 approach, leave to different augmentations
      to solve the problem their own way (see how it is done in
      [RFC8795])

   *  Augment RFC8345 by adding some simple solution (e.g. move
      [RFC8795] approach to RFC8345)

   *  Start working on RFC8345 bis that provides backward compatible
      enhancement (e.g. via [RFC8795] basic approach)

   We suggest to work on RFC8345 bis to provide the backward compatible
   way to add the missing supporting relationships:
   tp->supporting->node, node->supporting->network.






Havel, et al.            Expires 30 August 2024                [Page 18]

Internet-Draft            Digital Map Modelling            February 2024


5.1.7.  Missing Topology Semantics

   We already mentioned that some semantic is missing from the RFC8345
   topology model, like bidirectional and multi-point.  The following is
   also missing from the model:

   *  Relationship Properties.  The supporting relationship could have
      additional attributes that give more information about the
      supporting relationship.  That way we could use it for
      aggregation, underlay with primary/backup, load balancing, hop,
      sequence, etc.

   *  Termination point roles.  We are missing semantics for the common
      topology roles: primary, backup, hub, spoke

   *  Layers / Sublayers.  We need further analysis to determine in
      network types are sufficient to support all scenarios for layers/
      sublayers.  The network types are more related to technologies so
      in the case that the same technology is used at different layers,
      we may need some additional information in the model.  For further
      study.

   *  Tunnels and paths.  We modelled tunnels ad paths via [RFC8345] but
      we lost some semantics that is in RFC8795.

   *  Supporting or underlay.  We modelled all underlay relationships
      via supporting, further analysis is needed to determine pros and
      cons of this approach versus RFC8795 approach of using underlay
      topology.

   The following are the candidate approaches to address this
   limitation:

   *  Use the current RFC8345 approach, leave to different augmentations
      to solve the problem their own way (see how it is done in
      [RFC8795])

   *  Augment RFC8345 by adding some simple solution (e.g. move
      [RFC8795] approach to RFC8345)

   *  RFC8345 bis

   We suggest to work on RFC8345 bis to provide the backward compatible
   way to add the minimum semantics that the community agrees is
   required for the core topology.  We need to further investigate the
   [RFC8795] approach and evaluate if some parts could be moved to
   RFC8345.




Havel, et al.            Expires 30 August 2024                [Page 19]

Internet-Draft            Digital Map Modelling            February 2024


5.2.  Open Issues (for Further Analysis or Resolved)

   The following are the open issues that need further analysis or have
   been resolved:

   *  Do we need separation of L2 and L3 topologies?

      During the PoC we encountered different solutions with separate
      set of requirements.  In one solution, the L2 and L3 topology were
      the same with separate set of attributes, while in another
      solution we had difference in L2 and L3 topology (e.g.  Links
      Aggregation, Switches and Routers).

      The RFC8944 defines L2 topology and RFC8346 defines the L3
      topology.  They allow to have either one or two instances of this
      topology.

      The decision if we need separate network instances for L2 and L3
      topologies may be based on specific network topology and
      provider's preferences.

      Resolved: the RFC8345 is flexible and it can support both the same
      network instance with L2 + L3 augmentations or separate network
      instances with supporting relationship between.  The operator
      should decide what option is needed for their solution.

   *  Do we need sublayers as well?  Layers versus sublayers versus
      layered instances?

      Resolved: Layers/sublayers could be implemented via multiple
      network types.  The new data nodes for layer are present only when
      the network type for the layer is present.  The new data nodes for
      the sublayer are present when the network types for both layer and
      sublayer are present.  The solution could also enable either
      single or multiple instances, like in the previous point.

   *  Same technology at service versus underlay?  BGP per VPN vs common
      BGP shared between multiple VPNs.  Different layers, same model,
      relationship define the layer.

      Further analysis is needed.

   *  There are potential circular dependencies in layering.  For
      example routing can be underlay for tunnels, but tunnel interface
      can also be in the routing table.

   *  Further analysis is needed.




Havel, et al.            Expires 30 August 2024                [Page 20]

Internet-Draft            Digital Map Modelling            February 2024


5.3.  How to Augment for Generic Digital Map Extensions

   Generic Digital Map extensions are the RFC8345 extensions required
   for all technologies and layers in the Digital Map. We already
   discussed some options for individual limitations in the previous
   sections, here is the summary:

1. Use the current RFC8345 approach, leave to different augmentations to solve the problem their own way

2. Augment RFC8345 network, node, link and termination point for any
changes needed from a new digital map module ~~~~    module: dm-network-topology
       augment /nw:networks/nw:network:
               .... additions
       augment /nw:networks/nw:network/nw:node:
               .... additions
       augment /nw:networks/nw:network/nt:link:
               .... additions
       augment /nw:networks/nw:network/nw:node/nt:termination-point:
               .... additions

   // This can be a separate draft with describing pros and cons of //
   different approaches and yang model proposal.  Add reference to //
   this draft when submitted ~~~~

   3. Make backward compatible updates to RFC8345, work on RFC8345 bis

   The following are some important guidelines mentioned in the RFC8345
   that should be taken into account when suggesting the approach:

   *  "The data models allow applications to operate on an inventory or
      topology of any network at a generic level, where the specifics of
      particular inventory/topology types are not required.  At the same
      time, where data specific to a network type comes into play and
      the data model is augmented, the instantiated data still adheres
      to the same structure and is represented in a consistent fashion.
      This also facilitates the representation of network hierarchies
      and dependencies between different network components and network
      types"

   *  “It is possible for links at one level of a hierarchy to map to
      multiple links at another level of the hierarchy.
      For example, a VPN topology might model VPN tunnels as links.
      Where a VPN tunnel maps to a path that is composed of a chain of
      several links, the link will contain a list of those supporting
      links.  Likewise, it is possible for a link at one level of a
      hierarchy to aggregate a bundle of links at another level of the
      hierarchy."




Havel, et al.            Expires 30 August 2024                [Page 21]

Internet-Draft            Digital Map Modelling            February 2024


   Our recommendation on how to extend RFC8345 for Digital Map is to
   stay in spirit of RFC8345 and augment with non-topological info only.
   Reuse network, node, link, tp for all topological entities, reuse
   supporting for layering and add new properties/attributes and
   references to other modules Therefore, we suggest to work on RFC8345
   bis to provide the backward compatible way to address all identified
   limitations.

   The alternative of having the core topology augmentations in either
   te modules or technology specific modules is not generic enough and
   is not in the spirit of having the core topology model to model
   topology in the consistent manner between different technologies and
   te and non-te topologies.

5.4.  How to Augment for New Technologies/Layers

   There are already drafts that support augmentation for specific
   technologies.  These drafts augment network, node, termination point
   and link, but also add different topological entities inside
   augmentations.  For example, we have examples like this:

    module: new-module
            augment /nw:networks/nw:network/nw:network-types:
          +--rw new-topology!
                    augment /nw:networks/nw:network:
                                    ....
                    augment /nw:networks/nw:network/nw:node:
                            .... adding list of tps of other type
                                     (e.g. tunnel TPs in te draft)
                            ... adding new supporting relationship
                                     supporting-tunnel-termination-point
                                     (te draft)
                    augment /nw:networks/nw:network/nt:link:
                                    .... adding tunnels (te draft)
                    augment /nw:networks/nw:network/nw:node/
                                                  nt:termination-point:
                                    ....

   There is need to agree some guidelines for augmenting IETF network
   topology, so that additional topological information is not added in
   the custom way.  There is also need to categorize the current
   augmentations and the impact of RFC 8345 bis based on what has been
   added for different technologies:

   *  new properties/attributes (e.g. ietf-l2-topology, ietf-l3-unicast-
      topology, ietf-isis-topology)

   *  new events (e.g. ietf-l2-topology)



Havel, et al.            Expires 30 August 2024                [Page 22]

Internet-Draft            Digital Map Modelling            February 2024


   *  new topological entities (e.g. ietf-te-topology, ietf-dc-fabric-
      topology)

   *  new topological relations (e.g. ietf-te-topology)

   *  type reuse (e.g. ietf-dots-telemetry, ietf-dc-fabric-types, ietf-
      dc-fabric-topology)

      // This can be a separate draft.  Guidelines with examples?  Add
      reference to this draft when submitted

5.5.  How to connect to the external world

   Digital Map must be pluggable: * We must connect to other YANG
   modules for inventory, configuration, assurance, etc * Not everything
   can be in YANG, we need to connect digital map YANG model with other
   modelling mechanisms, both southbound, northbound and internally

5.5.1.  How to connect to other YANG modules

   There are already some modules that connect network topology to other
   YANG modules.  We will investigate different approaches and propose
   the best practices.  The following are some existing approaches
   proposed in IETF:

   *  How to connect network topology to interface
      [I-D.ietf-tp-interface-reference-topology]

   *  How to connect network topology to hardware inventory
      [I-D.draft-ietf-ccamp-network-inventory-yang]

   *  How to connect network topology to ivy inventory
      [I-D.ietf-network-inventory-topology]

   *  How to connect network topology to performance monitoring
      [RFC9375]

5.5.2.  How to connect YANG models with other modelling mechanisms

   There is need to connect YANG network topology to models and data
   outside of YANG, for example BMP, IPFIX, logs, etc.

5.6.  Digital Map APIs

   This will include hierarchical APIs for cross-domain figure, IETF
   YANG Based API (read and write, change subscription and notify) and
   Query API




Havel, et al.            Expires 30 August 2024                [Page 23]

Internet-Draft            Digital Map Modelling            February 2024


5.7.  Digital Map Knowledge

   The following knowledge was needed to build Digital Map:

   *  Abstract IETF Entities and Relationships as in [RFC8345]

   *  [RFC8345] Augmentations for a)Layers/sublayers b)Entities
      (services and subservices), c)Properties

   *  Rules for aggregating entities

   *  Rules for instantiating relationships (inter-layer and intra-
      layer)

   *  Mapping from devices and controllers

   What can be achieved with existing RFC8345 YANG:

   *  Entities (base class IETF Network, IETF Node, IETF Link, IETF TP)

   *  Properties

   *  Relationships

   Next steps

   *  How to support temporal

   *  How to support spacial

   *  How to support historical

6.  Related IETF Activities

6.1.  Network Topology

   Interestingly, we could not find any network topology definition in
   IETF RFCs (not even in [RFC8345]) or drafts.  However, it's mentioned
   in multiple documents.  As an example, in Overview and Principles of
   Internet Traffic Engineering [I-D.ietf-teas-rfc3272bis], which
   mentioned:

   To conduct performance studies and to support planning of existing
   and future networks, a routing analysis may be performed to determine
   the paths the routing protocols will choose for various traffic
   demands, and to ascertain the utilization of network resources as
   traffic is routed through the network.  Routing analysis captures the
   selection of paths through the network, the assignment of traffic



Havel, et al.            Expires 30 August 2024                [Page 24]

Internet-Draft            Digital Map Modelling            February 2024


   across multiple feasible routes, and the multiplexing of IP traffic
   over traffic trunks (if such constructs exist) and over the
   underlying network infrastructure.  A model of network topology is
   necessary to perform routing analysis.  A network topology model may
   be extracted from:

   *  Network architecture documents

   *  Network designs

   *  Information contained in router configuration files

   *  Routing databases such as the link state database of an interior
      gateway protocol (IGP)

   *  Routing tables

   *  Automated tools that discover and collate network topology
      information.

   Topology information may also be derived from servers that monitor
   network state, and from servers that perform provisioning functions.

6.2.  Core Digital Map Components

   The following standards are core for the Digital Map.

   *  IETF network model and network topology model [RFC8345]

   *  A YANG grouping for geographic location [RFC9179]

   *  IETF modules that augment [RFC8345] for different technologies:

   *  -  A YANG data model for Traffic Engineering (TE) Topologies
         [RFC8795]

   *  -  A YANG data model for Layer 2 network topologies [RFC8944]

   *  -  A YANG data model for OSFP topology
         [I-D.ogondio-opsawg-ospf-topology]

   *  -  A YANG data model for IS-IS topology
         [I-D.ogondio-opsawg-isis-topology]








Havel, et al.            Expires 30 August 2024                [Page 25]

Internet-Draft            Digital Map Modelling            February 2024


6.3.  Additional Digital Map Components

   The Digital Map may need to link to the following models, some are
   already augmenting [RFC8345], we need further investigation for each
   of these items:

   *  Service Access Point (SAP) [RFC9408], augments 'ietf-network' data
      model [RFC8345] by adding the SAP.

   *  SAIN [RFC9417] and [RFC9418]

   *  Network Inventory Model
      [I-D.draft-ietf-ivy-network-inventory-yang] is the latest
      inventory model proposed by ivy, focusing on physical and virtual
      inventory.  Logical inventory is currently outside of the scope.
      It does not augment RFC8345 like the two drafts that it evolved
      from [I-D.ietf-ccamp-network-inventory-yang] and
      [I-D.wzwb-opsawg-network-inventory-management].  The
      [I-D.draft-wzwb-ivy-network-inventory-topology] correlates the
      network inventory with the general topology via RFC8345
      augmentations that reference inventory.

   *  Data Model for Lifecycle Management and Operations
      [I-D.palmero-opsawg-dmlmo]

   *  KPIs: delay, jitter, loss

   *  Attachment Circuits (ACs) [I-D.boro-opsawg-ntw-attachment-circuit]
      and [I-D.boro-opsawg-teas-attachment-circuit]

   *  Configuration: L2SM [RFC8466], L3SM [RFC8299], L2NM [RFC9291],
      L3NM [RFC9182]

   *  Incident Management for Network Services
      [I-D.feng-opsawg-incident-management]

6.4.  Network Inventory (IVY) Proposed Working

   The charter of the Network Inventory (IVY) IETF Working Group (WG)
   can be found at https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/charter-ietf-ivy/.
   Understanding how the two efforts complement each other is important.

   The IVY effort focuses on the network inventory (as the charter says,
   "including a variety of information such as product name, vendor,
   product series, embedded software, and hardware/software versions").






Havel, et al.            Expires 30 August 2024                [Page 26]

Internet-Draft            Digital Map Modelling            February 2024


   The network inventory is probably the first use cases for the digital
   map.  Therefore, it is important to have a consistent view of what a
   network node is.  While a Digital Map must include a pointer to the
   hardware and software inventory information, we don't consider that
   all the inventory information is actually part of the Digital Map.
   It must also be noted that the set of use cases for the Digital Map
   is wider than just the network inventory.

   The IVY charter also says that, "The Working Group will consider
   existing IETF work, including RFC 8348 and RFC 8345.".  In this
   document, RFC 8345 is considered as the base YANG module, therefore,
   there is clearly common ground with the work of the ivy working
   group.  This document goes beyond RFC 8345 to evaluate whether that
   RFC, along with all the augmented YANG modules, would be a good fit
   for all the Digital Map requirements.

   Additionally, the IVY charter says, "The WG will also identify a set
   of requirements and guidelines to ensure consistency across models
   related to inventory."  While the IVY requirements and guidelines
   focus on inventory, this document looks at the full set of
   requirements, guidelines, and building blocks for all the Digital Map
   use cases.  The inventory use case does not cover that full set, and
   other building blocks will be required: for example, to support
   point-to-multipoint connectivity

   Thus, this Digital Map modelling effort is complementary to the
   inventory work in IVY.  It has a broader outlook covering all Digital
   Map use case requirements, and will correlate with the existing IETF
   models, e.g., topology, service attachment points (SAP), etc.

7.  Conclusions

   Digital Map Modelling and Data are basis for the Digital Twin.
   During our PoC we have proven that Digital Map can be modelled using
   [RFC8345].  Nevertheless, we proposed some extensions/augmentations
   to [RFC8345] to support Digital Maps.  There must be some constraints
   in regards to how to augment the core Digital Map model for different
   Layers and Technologies in order to support the approach recommended
   in RFC8345 and implemented in our PoC.  All entities must augment
   IETF node, IETF network, IETF link or IETF Termination Point and
   augmentation can only include new properties, events, references.

   We suggest to start the work on RFC8345 bis to provide the backward
   compatible way to support the following basic topological features:

   *  bidirectional links

   *  multipoint connectivity



Havel, et al.            Expires 30 August 2024                [Page 27]

Internet-Draft            Digital Map Modelling            February 2024


   *  cross-domain links via links between networks

   *  multi-domain via network partitioning

   *  shared topological entities between different domains

   *  additional supporting relations

   *  additional semantics required for core topologies

8.  Security Considerations

   The Digital Map exposes a lot of key details about the network that
   may be confidential and might be valuable to an attacker.

   Future revisions will add more details of what information needs to
   be protected and how it may be protected

9.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no actions for IANA.

10.  References

10.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174>.

   [RFC8345]  Clemm, A., Medved, J., Varga, R., Bahadur, N.,
              Ananthakrishnan, H., and X. Liu, "A YANG Data Model for
              Network Topologies", RFC 8345, DOI 10.17487/RFC8345, March
              2018, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8345>.

   [RFC8346]  Clemm, A., Medved, J., Varga, R., Liu, X.,
              Ananthakrishnan, H., and N. Bahadur, "A YANG Data Model
              for Layer 3 Topologies", RFC 8346, DOI 10.17487/RFC8346,
              March 2018, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8346>.







Havel, et al.            Expires 30 August 2024                [Page 28]

Internet-Draft            Digital Map Modelling            February 2024


   [RFC8944]  Dong, J., Wei, X., Wu, Q., Boucadair, M., and A. Liu, "A
              YANG Data Model for Layer 2 Network Topologies", RFC 8944,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8944, November 2020,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8944>.

10.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.boro-opsawg-ntw-attachment-circuit]
              Boucadair, M., Roberts, R., de Dios, O. G., Barguil, S.,
              and B. Wu, "A Network YANG Data Model for Attachment
              Circuits", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-boro-
              opsawg-ntw-attachment-circuit-03, 5 September 2023,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-boro-opsawg-
              ntw-attachment-circuit-03>.

   [I-D.boro-opsawg-teas-attachment-circuit]
              Boucadair, M., Roberts, R., de Dios, O. G., Barguil, S.,
              and B. Wu, "YANG Data Models for 'Attachment Circuits'-as-
              a-Service (ACaaS)", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft,
              draft-boro-opsawg-teas-attachment-circuit-07, 10 July
              2023, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-boro-
              opsawg-teas-attachment-circuit-07>.

   [I-D.davis-opsawg-some-refinements-to-rfc8345]
              Davis, N., Havel, O., and B. Claise, "Some Refinements to
              Network Topologies (RFC8345)", Work in Progress, Internet-
              Draft, draft-davis-opsawg-some-refinements-to-rfc8345-01,
              10 January 2024, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/
              draft-davis-opsawg-some-refinements-to-rfc8345-01>.

   [I-D.draft-ietf-ccamp-network-inventory-yang]
              Yu, C., Belotti, S., Bouquier, J., Peruzzini, F., and P.
              Bedard, "A YANG Data Model for Network Hardware
              Inventory", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-
              ccamp-network-inventory-yang-02, 9 July 2023,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-ccamp-
              network-inventory-yang-02>.

   [I-D.draft-ietf-ivy-network-inventory-yang]
              Yu, C., Belotti, S., Bouquier, J., Peruzzini, F., and P.
              Bedard, "A YANG Data Model for Network Inventory", Work in
              Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-ivy-network-
              inventory-yang-00, 5 December 2023,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-ivy-
              network-inventory-yang-00>.






Havel, et al.            Expires 30 August 2024                [Page 29]

Internet-Draft            Digital Map Modelling            February 2024


   [I-D.draft-wzwb-ivy-network-inventory-topology]
              Wu, B., Zhou, C., Wu, Q., and M. Boucadair, "A Network
              Inventory Topology Model", Work in Progress, Internet-
              Draft, draft-wzwb-ivy-network-inventory-topology-00, 18
              October 2023, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/
              draft-wzwb-ivy-network-inventory-topology-00>.

   [I-D.feng-opsawg-incident-management]
              Feng, C., Hu, T., Contreras, L. M., Graf, T., Wu, Q., Yu,
              C., and N. Davis, "Incident Management for Network
              Services", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-feng-
              opsawg-incident-management-04, 30 January 2024,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-feng-opsawg-
              incident-management-04>.

   [I-D.ietf-ccamp-network-inventory-yang]
              Yu, C., Belotti, S., Bouquier, J., Peruzzini, F., and P.
              Bedard, "A YANG Data Model for Network Hardware
              Inventory", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-
              ccamp-network-inventory-yang-02, 9 July 2023,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-ccamp-
              network-inventory-yang-02>.

   [I-D.ietf-network-inventory-topology]
              "*** BROKEN REFERENCE ***".

   [I-D.ietf-teas-rfc3272bis]
              Farrel, A., "Overview and Principles of Internet Traffic
              Engineering", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-
              ietf-teas-rfc3272bis-27, 12 August 2023,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-teas-
              rfc3272bis-27>.

   [I-D.ietf-tp-interface-reference-topology]
              "*** BROKEN REFERENCE ***".

   [I-D.irtf-nmrg-network-digital-twin-arch]
              Zhou, C., Yang, H., Duan, X., Lopez, D., Pastor, A., Wu,
              Q., Boucadair, M., and C. Jacquenet, "Digital Twin
              Network: Concepts and Reference Architecture", Work in
              Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-irtf-nmrg-network-digital-
              twin-arch-04, 23 October 2023,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-irtf-nmrg-
              network-digital-twin-arch-04>.

   [I-D.ogondio-opsawg-isis-topology]
              de Dios, O. G., Barguil, S., Lopez, V., Ceccarelli, D.,
              and B. Claise, "A YANG Data Model for Intermediate System



Havel, et al.            Expires 30 August 2024                [Page 30]

Internet-Draft            Digital Map Modelling            February 2024


              to intermediate System (IS-IS) Topology", Work in
              Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-ogondio-opsawg-isis-
              topology-01, 23 October 2023,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ogondio-
              opsawg-isis-topology-01>.

   [I-D.ogondio-opsawg-ospf-topology]
              de Dios, O. G., Barguil, S., and V. Lopez, "A YANG Data
              Model for Open Shortest Path First (OSPF) Topology", Work
              in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-ogondio-opsawg-ospf-
              topology-01, 23 October 2023,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ogondio-
              opsawg-ospf-topology-01>.

   [I-D.palmero-opsawg-dmlmo]
              Palmero, M., Brockners, F., Kumar, S., Bhandari, S.,
              Cardona, C., and D. Lopez, "Data Model for Lifecycle
              Management and Operations", Work in Progress, Internet-
              Draft, draft-palmero-opsawg-dmlmo-10, 7 July 2023,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-palmero-
              opsawg-dmlmo-10>.

   [I-D.wzwb-opsawg-network-inventory-management]
              Wu, B., Zhou, C., Wu, Q., and M. Boucadair, "A YANG
              Network Data Model of Network Inventory", Work in
              Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-wzwb-opsawg-network-
              inventory-management-04, 19 October 2023,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-wzwb-opsawg-
              network-inventory-management-04>.

   [RFC8299]  Wu, Q., Ed., Litkowski, S., Tomotaki, L., and K. Ogaki,
              "YANG Data Model for L3VPN Service Delivery", RFC 8299,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8299, January 2018,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8299>.

   [RFC8466]  Wen, B., Fioccola, G., Ed., Xie, C., and L. Jalil, "A YANG
              Data Model for Layer 2 Virtual Private Network (L2VPN)
              Service Delivery", RFC 8466, DOI 10.17487/RFC8466, October
              2018, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8466>.

   [RFC8795]  Liu, X., Bryskin, I., Beeram, V., Saad, T., Shah, H., and
              O. Gonzalez de Dios, "YANG Data Model for Traffic
              Engineering (TE) Topologies", RFC 8795,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8795, August 2020,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8795>.






Havel, et al.            Expires 30 August 2024                [Page 31]

Internet-Draft            Digital Map Modelling            February 2024


   [RFC9179]  Hopps, C., "A YANG Grouping for Geographic Locations",
              RFC 9179, DOI 10.17487/RFC9179, February 2022,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9179>.

   [RFC9182]  Barguil, S., Gonzalez de Dios, O., Ed., Boucadair, M.,
              Ed., Munoz, L., and A. Aguado, "A YANG Network Data Model
              for Layer 3 VPNs", RFC 9182, DOI 10.17487/RFC9182,
              February 2022, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9182>.

   [RFC9291]  Boucadair, M., Ed., Gonzalez de Dios, O., Ed., Barguil,
              S., and L. Munoz, "A YANG Network Data Model for Layer 2
              VPNs", RFC 9291, DOI 10.17487/RFC9291, September 2022,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9291>.

   [RFC9375]  Wu, B., Ed., Wu, Q., Ed., Boucadair, M., Ed., Gonzalez de
              Dios, O., and B. Wen, "A YANG Data Model for Network and
              VPN Service Performance Monitoring", RFC 9375,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9375, April 2023,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9375>.

   [RFC9408]  Boucadair, M., Ed., Gonzalez de Dios, O., Barguil, S., Wu,
              Q., and V. Lopez, "A YANG Network Data Model for Service
              Attachment Points (SAPs)", RFC 9408, DOI 10.17487/RFC9408,
              June 2023, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9408>.

   [RFC9417]  Claise, B., Quilbeuf, J., Lopez, D., Voyer, D., and T.
              Arumugam, "Service Assurance for Intent-Based Networking
              Architecture", RFC 9417, DOI 10.17487/RFC9417, July 2023,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9417>.

   [RFC9418]  Claise, B., Quilbeuf, J., Lucente, P., Fasano, P., and T.
              Arumugam, "A YANG Data Model for Service Assurance",
              RFC 9418, DOI 10.17487/RFC9418, July 2023,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9418>.

Acknowledgments

   Thanks to xx for their reviews and comments.

Contributors

   Nigel Davis
   Ciena
   Email: ndavis@ciena.com


Authors' Addresses




Havel, et al.            Expires 30 August 2024                [Page 32]

Internet-Draft            Digital Map Modelling            February 2024


   Olga Havel
   Huawei
   Email: olga.havel@huawei.com


   Benoit Claise
   Huawei
   Email: benoit.claise@huawei.com


   Oscar González de Dios
   Telefonica
   Email: oscar.gonzalezdedios@telefonica.com


   Ahmed Elhassany
   Swisscom
   Email: Ahmed.Elhassany@swisscom.com


   Thomas Graf
   Swisscom
   Email: thomas.graf@swisscom.com


   Mohamed Boucadair
   Orange
   Email: mohamed.boucadair@orange.com























Havel, et al.            Expires 30 August 2024                [Page 33]
